# Primer on the crypto-ecosystem

When I was still early in my crypto explorations, I was very skeptical of most "blockchain" projects. To me, only Bitcoin made sense. The technology had stood the test of time; a buzzing market; a great story; and plenty of innovative ways to grow. As I went deeper into the rabbit-hole, I realized that I wasn’t the only one who shared that sentiment. Lots of folks in the past believed that too, only to change their mind later. I felt far behind in the race. But I was game. I rolled up my sleeves and dived right into the meat of the matter. After reading a dozen few specifications and critiques of crypto analysts, it became clear to me that there were a lot less imposters than I had previously anticipated. Limitations of Bitcoin were very real. When Turing Award winners get into the race of creating a [better Bitcoin](https://www.coindesk.com/turing-award-winners-blockchain-opens-test-network-to-public), you can safely assume that there is some unsolved problem here. The terminology, that initially I didn't like, started to resonate with me. I'd even go as far as to say that the notion of blockchain makes complete sense. It's a class of decentralized database protocols that communicate via consensus. It's not a database. It really demonstrates the limitations of the CAP theorem. The more I explored various projects, the more it began to dawn on me how naive I had been to consider myself a person with an authority. At this point, I was feeling insecure and doubtful of whether to pursue further? But as the unwise saying goes: in for a penny, in for a pound!

At least, by now, I was fairly convinced that I had mapped out the ecosystem. There are always newcomers to the scene, but I knew the big players. As time passed, I saw projects falter. And I realized that some ideas, although brilliant in nature, weren't really able to establish themselves. Other took much, much longer. I saw all sorts of startup fail. Some with really smart minds behind them. Some with backing from the top notch VCs. Some had enough power of influence to move markets. Yet it seemed impossible to tell who was on the right track. At times, you'd see a team of four twenty-something from midwest Milwaukee building a product that seems quite trivial in nature but over time develops strong momentum. It’s a mad world. But, however it is, it can be circumscribed by one common objective: to build the crypto-economy for the world. The superset of cryptocurrencies. I might not do justice in pin-pointing the motivations. But you can sense that everyone in this space seem to have embarked on a collective mission. They see problems with how money and power works. And they think it's possible to do better. Some think it's best to rebuild finance ground up. Others believe that crypto can be used to used to empower developing economies. Some fare that government and Wall Street has amassed too much power in their hands. And it is time to present financial alternatives. This puts cryptocurrency in a very promising position. But over-promising and under-delivering leads to a bitter taste. And lately, that has been the case. So I want spend a few minutes to highlight how crypto-economy is uniquely positioned and what I expect to see going forward. Bear in mind, this is decade-long process and we only make small incremental progress.

Why is crypto-economy even necessary? Or more broadly, why do we need an open financial system? The reason is staring us in the face. Yet it took me a while to get it. And I spent years sleeping on it. Crypto is money and if I say that money is broken, you'd probably assume that maybe people aren't correctly incentivatized. Maybe the disparity between rich and poor has grown to a large degree. Not untrue, but not exactly news either. The real issue is that our system is simply outdated and ill-equipped to take on modern challenges. Take globalization for instance. The nations of the past were built on ideologies. That simply isn't true anymore. As a person belonging to a religious minority, I don't need the state to protect me. Seeking asylum was the solution of previous era. Today we, citizens of the world, know how to react. The world is connected in ways like never before. If you live in a metropolitan city, like I do, you probably meet a bunch of people belonging to different races; religions; nationalities speaking in different languages and dialects. Our wealth is distributed in various parts of the world. Chinese investors buy land in US. You, a trader, can invest in Japanese stocks - and effectively Japanese companies. Most people I know have lived in at least two different continents and if not, they have visited a few different places. Our devices are mobile. Our rest-places transient. And while, we have gone global, our social institutions haven't. We cap internationals coming into our institutions. We put restrictions on certain rights that leads up to exploitation. We debate climate change, but hold no institutional body responsible. We declare wars on terrorism - not by consensus, but by authority. Internet companies build nation-blind products, but face challenges on national fronts. Citizens of different countries are not treated equally. And Bitcoin? Bitcoin isn't just decentralized currency. Bitcoin is a digital, nation-less, unstoppable currency - built by an unknown person(s). Bitcoin is a movement. Not just an attempt to make money - as many incorrectly presume. Bitcoin gives birth to an open financial system.

Due to lack of understanding of finance, most people tend to focus too much the consumer economics. When will I buy coffee with Bitcoin? Asked Joey. The answer is definitely not today. But the real difficult questions are how will cryptocurrency provide safeguards against flash crashes? When will it be possible to invest in it safely? When can I use it for payroll? Or when will it stop being used illegaly? A key metric to take into account is the weight of the investment. If all people in the world put in a dollar in cryptocurrency, that would only amount to \$8 billion. Compare that to just the market cap of S&P 500 which stands at roughly \$21 trillion. Now imagine if we create a stock market that trade shares of all the companies in the world. How big would that be? Most people are looking in the wrong direction. Cryptocurrency needs to bootstrap financial markets. A movement that has already started, but it is still way too early. If there is one takeaway lesson from my learnings. It's this one. Eventually, this new type of finance can be combined with economic principles and maybe even birth to an entirely new form of governance. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. What are the main problems that need to be solved in order to get there?

Trust is a core tenet of finance. If you have spent time building technology products, this might be a hardest pill to swallow. Trust has to be obtained. If your reputation is tarnished, neither a great marketer nor can a brilliant sales pitch can help you. While your father's advice might change your mind about making an investment. Gold is widely respected as a commodity because it has accurued that level of credibility over decades. If financial markets are shaken up, people would retort back to gold as a safe haven. When Ray Dalio was asked about Bitcoin, after fears of recession, his response was that Bitcoin is very volatile and hence not a good store of value. That upsetted many crypto folks. But he is right. Murad Mahmudov, a cryptocurrency trader who has made quite a name for himself, understands this quite well and has built his investment thesis around maturing level of trust in Bitcoin. He argues that Bitcoin, over time, would stabilize in value and achieve the true store of value status. Eventually becoming a unit of account and a medium of exchange. A view many contest. I have my own opinions too. If there is anything I've learnt from being in this space is that it evolves rapidly. For a casual lurker, crypto narratives might be hard to follow. But anyone in the rabbit-hole can tell you how fast the story is developing. Hence I believe that instead of sitting around and waiting for Bitcoin to achieve that level of trust, the ecosystem, as a whole, will end up building something less risk averse on top of the current infrastructure. Risk would be controlled by turning nobs and handles. This is already in very nascent stages. But over time financial engineering will allow for less-risky investments and essentially enable more liquidity to be injected into the system enabling further experimentation. One can make a case that tokens that are pegged to stable value are examples of such level of control. Such as Maker and \$DAI. Blockchain company Compound further allows you to earn interest on \$DAI. Today if you Google "DeFi", you will find a plethora of interesting projects that are building on the premise of introducing more financial engineering into the ecosystem.

But I believe financial engineering alone isn't sufficient. Regulation plays a big part in finance. Who is to be held accountable if a blockchain company holding a \$1 billion position decides to exit-scam and ends up buying mansions in Malta? We have to introduce some regulatory measures. That isn't all theoretical and wishful-thinking. Maker is a decentralized body that attempts to regulate the control of the stable coin \$DAI by allowing token-holders to vote on key issues. But it's challenging problem. Recently, nearly \$1 million were lost in arbitrage as a new player attempted to build a complex financial intrument. Who is be blamed in such a scenario? The contract developers who missed the loophole? Product owners that released the feature without thorough testing? Or people whose money were lost? A more prominent example is that of ICOs that raised a ton of money and didn't deliver on the promise. In lieu of that, intial exchange offerings were proposed that haven't quite materialized, but allow more guarantees for investors. Insurance, on the blockchain, is another fascinating movement to watch and new players such as Opyn are trying to tap into this market. All-in-all, I believe that regulations has to get better on blockchain. And it has to come internally - as opposed to external measures from a jurisdiction providing assurances that customer's assets are in safe hands.

Another very interesting movement that started with cryptocurrency, but has now diverged into a class of its own is: decentralized ledgers. The idea here being that instead of having central servers where our data is stored, let’s leverage the blockchain technology to create records that owned via private/public key and live in a unified, shared ledger that can not be tampered with. There are lots of interesting proposals for this and it’s a problem close to the heart of many engineers. You’d be surprised to learn that while the technology is almost ready for consumption, the market for it doesn’t quite exist. For instance, no-one quite cares about decentralized YouTube when the real YouTube has all the content you want to consume. I believe that as novel business use-cases arise, this space will evolve. For instance, what if we want integrate Facebook-like identity into national passports? How nearly everyone has a Facebook account arguably makes it the best form of verification of someone’s identity. However, in order to support such a use-case, we’d need stronger controls over privacy.

My last point is probably the biggest stretch of imagination. Imagine for a second that we are able to successfully bootstrap financial markets. We are able to build a fair, open and efficient markets - creating ripples across the emerging private sector - onboarding new ventures across the globe via tokenization. Crypto finds its way into our wallets and usage. People have assets stored digitally. Investment companies on cryptocurrency become highly efficient - making decent money and enabling more businesses to prosper. Financial inclusion becomes strong that no matter where you are in the world, you can participate in the global economy. Investors are able to tap into talent from remote locations. More niche categories are developed. The world gets a boost of acceleration and pace of innovation increases. The decentralized ledgers are able to protect privacy of users in some capacity. Assets and certificates start to get digitized and verifiable over the network. My question is: will this breed a new form of governance? Maybe an overarching, supra-national form of control that ensures interest of the global citizens equipped with financial power. To protect its users against abuse by powerful entities. Regulated by machinery that sees only efficient markets and is blind to race, color or gender. Governmence powered by smart contracts triggered by humans. Transparent and incorruptible - but susceptible to bugs. Maybe it would grow out small. But it would be the first time ever in human history that we'd see a truly global governance system. And overtime, it can even evolve into a complex machinery that determines various other aspects of society. I am not entirely certain if it'll ever materialize. But it can and it could become immensely powerful. Let's just pause there.
